# Formal and Informal English Classification

The interesting file in this repositary is ```informaAndFormalClassifcation.ipynb``` where all the steps of the experiment are displayed. 

## Introduction
The purpose of text categorization [1] is to classify text documents into different pre-defined classes.  There is little published research into the classification of formal andinformal (English) text.  A systematic study on text formality classification is missingfrom the literature so far.  The most relevant work about formal and informal text clas-sification is done by Fadi Abu Sheikha and Diana Inkpen [2].  They classify formal andinformal  documents  based  on  the  features  extracted  from  the  data  sets.   Some  short-comings of their research are discussed in the following paragraph.  Based on analysisand our critical review of this research, we extend the binary classification model fromthe fore-mentioned research to a multi-class classification model.  Instead of predictinga  document  as  either  formal  or  informal,  we  also  work  on  a  model  that  can  predictthe formality of a document on a scale from one to three, with degree one being veryinformal, two being semi-formal/informal, and degree three as very formal.  In the end,we  discuss  which  key  factors  contribute  to  the  formality  or  informality  of  a  text  andprovide some ideas or solutions to change the text style.  Our objective is to achieve asustainable and replicable model with a high accuracy with the flexibility to extend itfor the future research.The prior research [2] do not disclose the exact algorithm they used, and they extractthe feature using Connexor parser [3] which is not convenient to use locally.  The datasets used in the research are not optimal and inconsistent.  For example, in the Enronemail dataset, even though emails are usually informal in the setting of normal life, manyemails in the Enron data sets are quite formal,  as expected from a former huge com-pany.  Some of the data sets they used include annotations that are difficult to cleansemanually.  The rest of the data sets are adequate for the classification, and we also usesome of them in our heterogeneous dataset.This research improves on the prior study and provide an implementation of the textclassification models to assistYoastfor their future development in that field.  Yoast [4]provides a SEO (search engine optimization) plugin for Wordpress and other other simi-lar platforms, which has been used across millions of websites.  The function of the SEO
plugin is to help users achieve a high position in search engine results.  This includes of-fering feedback and suggestions for improvements to the content of their websites.  In thispaper, we focus on the formality side of writing since the styles of writing can influencethe readers’ attitude towards the content.  For example, when reading a fun story, onewould expect the creator to make use of abbreviation, slang, colloquial language,etc..  Onthe other hand, in a newspaper, readers like to see more formal and serious text to buildtrust in the content of the newspaper.  Since text formality and informality contributegreatly to the content of its users,  Yoast would like to make the informal and formalclassification  a  tool  to  assist  the  process  of  content  creation.   This  thesis  starts  witha replication of the text formality classification method from the research [2] done byFadi Abu Sheikha and Diana Inkpen.  Afterwards, we extend the research to multi-classclassification on heterogeneous datasets.  The concept of the models is well structuredto allow for modifications and follow-up research in the future.Following [2], we extract features from each document and quantify the features as nu-merals.  After the desired features for each documents are extracted, we train and verifythe model with stratified k-fold cross validation.  Afterwards, we examine the featuresto see which (subset of) features are essential when distinguishing formal and informaltexts with a recursive feature selection method.In the discussion section we compare several kinds of classifiers (Decision tree classifier,logistic regression classifier and random forest) in the experiment, analyze and discussthe classifiers based on two different datasets, and implement the mock-up classificationalgorithms.   The  choices  made  for  the  classifiers  are  limited  by  the  JavaScript  imple-mentation.   For  decision  tree  model,  we  only  need  to  distinguish  different  documentsaccording to the feature splitting suggested by the decision tree model.  In other words,the decision tree result could be utilized to create a rule-based algorithm.  For logisticregression, we could apply the weight and bias to the features and get an approximateresult  to  determine  the  type  of  document.   In  the  end,  we  also  discuss  what  makesdocuments formal and informal and how to interchange them

<em>The entire thesis will be posted in the future...</em>
